You will start from assembling phage genomes and we will give you 1,000 simulated error-free reads, randomly sampled from the phage genome. And I want to tell you that the phi X174 genome is a circle genome. Each read will be 100 nucleotides long. To add suspense, all genomes in this capstone will contain a tag, a 10-nucleotide-long insertion, that we added to the genome to make your life a little bit more difficult. And your goal will be to figure out the sequence of the tag. You are now facing the genome sequencing problem, which is to reconstruct a genome from reads. Input to the genome is a collection of strings, Reads and output is string genome reconstructed from Reads. Is the problem clear? This is the first example of the problem in this specialization that has not been well formulated. This is actually not a computational problem, because I have not described precisely what does it mean to assemble a genome from Reads? In fact, it will be your task to figure out how to formulate algorithmic statement for this biological problem, what does it mean to assemble a genome? You will need to formulate a rigorous algorithmic problem that adequately models genome assembly. And it will be more like in real life, because in real life you won't be presented with perfect algorithmic formulations. You will presented with real life problems and you goal will be first to transform this real life problems into computational problems. And later on to solve the problem using the algorithms that you learned in this course. And your programming challenge will be after you formulate this problem. Your programming challenge will be to assemble mutated phi genome from simulated error-free reads and find out the inserted tag. After you assemble phage genome from error-free reads, your more complex task will be to assemble this same genome from error-prone reads. And in this case, each read will have errors only substitutions of nucleotide, no insertion and deletions with it's probability 1% at each position. This is actually similar to the errors in real sequencing reads. And first you have to formulate this question, which means formulate the rigorous algorithmic problems that adequately model genome assembly from error prone reads. And finally solves the programming challenge, assembling mutated phage genome from simulated error-prone reads and of course, finding the inserted tag. In fact, this programming challenge is very similar to the challenge that Fred Sanger, the inventor of modern DNA sequencing, faced 30 years ago when he assembled the same phage genome. However, at that time, sequencing was very expensive and extending his sequencing method to human genome at that time would cost hundreds of billions of dollars and would be impractical. And that's why many scientists try to find out what would be a better experimental technology to sequence a genome. And that's how they came up with the idea of GeneChip that we will discuss in the next section. [MUSIC] 