In the previous section of this presentation, we gave you a somewhat idealized view of genome assembly. Now let's go to a more realistic description of how biologists sequence the genome. The reality is that these days they don't generate individual reads. They generate pairs of reads. To achieve this goal, they randomly cut genome into large, equally or roughly equally sized fragments of size in short lengths. And then afterwards, they read just the prefix and suffix of each size segment. For example, the modern most populated technology today reads 250 nucleotides from the beginning and 250 nucleotides from the end of size segment. But the additional piece of information you get from this experiment is this. Two reads within a read-pair are separated by a certain length which is called InsertLength. So an important update on modern sequencing technology is that instead of generating individual reads, biologists generate read-pairs. And our goal is to take advantage of additional information that read-pairs generate which is the distance between them. In other words, if you have a genome and I showed you Read 1, which is TCA shown in red, and Read 2, which is TCC shown in blue. In addition to this rates we also know the distance between this read. And a paired k-mer is a pair of k-mer at a fixed distance d apart in the Genome. For example TCA, the red one and TCC is the blue segment at distance d equal 11 apart. Disclaimer, biologists actually cannot measure the exact distance. They only measure approximate distance. But for a start, we will assume that the distance is exact. To model generation of paired-reads, we will consider PairedComposition of a string instead of composition that we considered before. And PairedComposition of the string will consist, let's say, from a paired 3-mer TAA, then unknown nucleotide, and then GCC here. And the PairedComposition will represent all such paired streamers as shown here. And the problem we will be facing is string reconstruction from read-pairs. Input, a set of paired k-mer, and output, a string Text such that PairedComposition of Text coincide with the set of paired k-mers. And of course it assumes that the distance between paired k-mers based on a read-pair is not. How would de Bruijn assemble paired k-mers? If you understood the idea behind the de Bruijn graph approach here's a hint. Consider a paired de Bruijn graph. [MUSIC] 